                                                                             
                                CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

       The fin de siècle of the nineteenth century saw slight improvement in the lives of white

middle-and upper-class American women trying to escape the confining conditions of patriarchal

authority. In a growing consensus, these women protested their exclusion from participating in

activities outside of the home considered the domain and prerogative of men. Women privileged

by social status were separated from public discourse and sequestered in their home as the proper

place for women and children by sentiments of protected isolation. Social ideas about women

were dictated by literature, sentiment, and the authority and praxis of medical professionals who

eagerly proffered opinions on the nature, cause, and cure of women’s nervous conditions. The

latter grounded firmly in decades of European and American praxis and precedent. In the West,

the medical profession was populated with “enlightened” male physicians who opined on the

origin of neurasthenia in women. Laurinda Dixon (1995) remarks that their opinions about

“uterine hysteria and intellectual melancholy” in women marked female gender frail and in need

of protection (9). Many medical practitioners advised against any intellectual activity for women

who complained of nervous disorders and, instead, prescribed quiet and bedrest.

       In 1890, Charlotte Perkins Gilman reflected on her own recent experience of protective

custody after she lapsed into a state of melancholy following the birth of her child and, on advice

of an eminent physician, was prescribed bedrest and cessation of intellectual endeavor. Gilman’s

response to her physician’s prescriptive isolation was to write a protest framed by her short story

“The Yellow Wallpaper” to comment on what she saw as the inequitable treatment of women

living under socially constructed definitions of gender that kept women at home. The short story

received the critical attention of women who, like the author, were resentful of a destiny imposed

by biology and by medical practitioners who felt threatened by its explicit honesty.



                                                 6
       Gilman’s story takes place in an isolated colonial mansion where the heroine is enclosed

and kept under strict scrutiny by her physician/husband who forbids her to write or engage any

intellectual activity; frustrated and denied any creative outlet, she projects her resistance and

persona onto the forms she perceives in the yellow wallpaper lining the dormant nursery room

upstairs in the old house that her husband, against her will, decided they would use. In this thesis,

I analyze the linguistic features of metaphor, metonymy, and narrative gap to show how Gilman

represents social structures as physical structures of confinement that are experienced by women

such as the protagonist in her story and how such enclosures extrapolate to include all women.

       I argue that Gilman imbues her narrative with metaphorical references that carry feminist

implications of resistance to the male authority represented in her story and, more, as a political

commentary on the social institutions that impede women’s progress into the expressly public

domain beyond their domestic enclosure. Gilman uses metonymy and narrative gap as literary

tools in her narrative to add meaning through extended reference and to create dramatic tension.

The goal of this thesis is to illuminate the corresponding connections between social institutions

of marriage and domesticity and the physical structures portrayed by Gilman. In 1892, Gilman’s

work was published in the New England Magazine where it met with disdain by literary critics

and earned rebuke from one physician who, in a letter to the editor of The Boston Evening

Transcript, wrote: “It is graphically told in a somewhat sensational style . . . holding the reader in

morbid fascination, it certainly seems open to serious question if such literature should be

permitted in print” (8 April 1892). In response, Gilman printed an explanation for writing the

story in the feminist monthly magazine she edited and published, The Forerunner:

       For many years I suffered from a severe and continuous nervous breakdown tending to

       melancholia—and beyond. During about the third year of this trouble I went in devout



                                                  7
       faith . . . to a noted specialist in nervous diseases. This wise man put me to bed and

       applied the rest cure. He concluded there was nothing much the matter with me and sent

       me home with the solemn advice to “live as domestic a life as far as possible,” and to

       “have but two hours intellectual life a day” and, “never to touch pen, brush or pencil

       again as long as I lived” I went home and obeyed those directions . . . and came so near

       the borderline of utter mental ruin that I could see over. (271)

Following a long career as a writer and a tumultuous life underscored by hardship and poverty,

Gilman finally met with success as a feminist intellectual who lectured for women’s rights and

suffragist causes. As editor in chief of the Forerunner Monthly Magazine (1909-1916), Gilman

espoused her views on the politics of gender to further progressive ideas about women’s social

change and advancement. In addition to her work as a writer, Gilman’s decision to divorce her

husband was a source of controversy and, after her death, Gilman’s fictional work fell into

obscurity until other feminist writers revived it decades later. In later years, Gilman’s story

received as much, if not more, attention from feminists as when she wrote it.

       Within the literary canon of women’s writing, Gilman’s text has been reviewed by a

diverse audience of readers with opposing political agendas alternately claiming her work as

feminist, divergent, and/or psychologically revealing. The authors of The Madwoman in the

Attic, Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar (1979) find feminist traditions of “enclosure and escape”

in a “distinctively female literary tradition” (xi). In contrast, Conrad Shumaker (1985) argues

that, although feminists present a cogent argument, “The Yellow Wallpaper transcends its

author’s immediate intent,” illuminating the question of women’s role in nineteenth century

imagination (589). Beate Schöpp-Schilling (1975) reviews Gilman’s story as a “specific kind of

psychological realism” unappreciated for its contribution to the study of mental illness (284).



                                                  8
       Returning to a feminist agenda, Thomas Erskine and Connie Richards (1993) comment

on the “critical interest” in Gilman’s text by the feminist press, noting connections between the

protagonist’s descent into madness and the author’s analysis of her own breakdown represent

“every woman’s plight in a culture defined by patriarchal condescension” (9). Since its initial

review by the feminist press in 1973, subsequent analysis by feminists reframe such assumptions

of power and cultural condescension to instead emphasize reformation of the literary canon.

Annette Kolodny (1980) notes a generational carryover of literary influence among writers who

are included in a shared canon of literary heritage, a literary discrimination that leads her to ask

what happens when readers and writers find themselves “cut off and alien from that dominant

tradition” (453). Similarly, Judith Fetterley (1986) takes issue with the entrapment of women in

text-worlds written by men in which they are denied self-recognition and agency. Fetterley notes

silencing the female other in male textuality precipitates a crisis of identity for women who see

themselves imaged in such texts and contends the reason why women are subsumed and made

silent is the anxiety over loss of power and control (182). Fetterley argues that women become

characters in masculine texts that bear no relation to reality and, in losing the power to define

themselves, “are forced to deny their own reality” (183). Patrocinio Schweikart and Elizabeth

Flynn (1986) review the issue, writing, “For men, reading women’s stories means confronting

themselves reflected in the eyes of women—they must endure the gaze of the other” (xix).

       The shift of feminist argument reflects the struggle for the inclusion of texts that reify the

voice of women outside the cultural definition of femininity. In deference to the argument,

Erskine and Richards argue feminists reframe their arguments in sophisticated analogies that

connect Gilman’s story of confinement to the confining silence of an exclusive literary canon

that determines what “women may or should read” (11).



                                                  9
         Internecine conflict among feminist critics in their approach to, and critique of, literary

texts has led to the reevaluation of prioritized agendas pursued by feminist scholars between

1970-1980. In a critical review of previous feminist scholarship on “The Yellow Wallpaper,”

Julie Bates Dock (1998) offers a fresh perspective on the “privilege of some kinds of scholarship

over others” (53). Dock cites deliberate and omissive delinquencies in the verbatim transmission

of the text that directly impact the way it is received and interpreted, arguing, “recent editions

offer variations in the wording at several critical points” (53). Dock’s review agrees with the

prioritized emphasis of feminist review that “struggle[d] to gain a foothold for women writers in

literary studies . . . and often took precedence over textual criticism” (53). Dock cites the failure

of feminist scholars to accurately reproduce the original text and offers her own reprint as the

“most authoritative” due to her verbatim reiteration of the text in the 1892 edition of New

England Magazine (55).

         In accord with Dock, my analysis follows using text emphasized in the original version.

The literary review of Gilman’s text in this qualitative analysis will be aided by exploring her use

of linguistic features such as metaphor, metonymy, and narrative gap to offer new interpretations

of her work. Zoltán Kövecses (2010) defines use of cognitive linguistic metaphor, i.e. conceptual

metaphor, as “understanding one conceptual domain in terms of another conceptual domain”

using the sort of cognitive mapping that occurs in transposing mental constructs (4). Underlying

that action are assumptions of cognitive transference among congruent correspondents of each

construct going from the abstract to the concrete. For instance, Kövecses uses the example LIFE

IS A JOURNEY 1    to illustrate “coherently organized knowledge about journeys” that is relied on to

understand the more abstract concept of life (4).

         1
           Kövecses suggests the use of small capital letters to indicate phrases that do not occur in a text under
question, but conceptually underlie all the metaphorical expressions that proceed from it (4).

                                                           10
       Gilman uses metaphors to connect her story to themes of authority and confinement in

the politics of institutions she finds oppressive to women, such as marriage and domesticity.

Joanna Gavins (2007) introduces Text World Theory as a viable theory of constructing internal

concepts, scripts, and schemas of experienced life situations that result in stored mental images

or “text-worlds which enable us to conceptualize and understand every piece of language we

encounter” (2). Gavins investigates the mental representations people use in reconstructing the

fictional worlds of text they translate into relatable experiences by drawing upon knowledge

stores of familiar events and situations. Gavins explains that people construct mental models of

everyday existence using “holistic analogues” representing real-life situations by which people

negotiate correspondence between internalized scripts and textual representations (4).

       This thesis allows the complementary qualities of both theories to reexamine and

reevaluate the text of “The Yellow Wallpaper” and elicit a more thorough understanding of the

author’s meaning. As well, two other theories are applied to the analysis of Gilman’s text:

Hypothetical World Theory for its contribution to how fictional worlds are formed and Feminist

Theory for Gilman’s affiliation with the women’s activist movement and the way in which the

nuances in the text incline toward that focus. Hypothetical World Theory (HWT) is presented by

Marie-Laure Ryan and Alice Bell (2019), who propose fictional worlds as alternative realities in

which “things could be different from what they are” (3) and as possible alternatives in a many

world’s ontology. While the benefits HWT affords to the pliability of the text are positive, the

exponential possibilities of “what if” that result are requisite to Gilman’s text as she transitions

the inanimate qualities of the wallpaper into forces of opposition acting to restrain and imprison

women. HWT is critical to the necessary engagement of readers in their complicity to compose

fictional worlds and in the readers’ cooperation to supply missing narrative.



                                                  11
       Critical Feminist Literary Theory (CFLT), due to its overwhelming representation by a

number of extraordinary scholars, needs to be defined more precisely and categorized according

to the particular ideology governing its focus. For this thesis, I propose to focus on a liberal

perspective represented by leading feminist scholars in the field of literary studies. Cora Kaplan

(1996), Mary Maynard (2006), and Rosemarie Tong (2014) are but a few of the leading feminist

theorists in this area who guide this review, adding to the interrogation of the text with insight

from their ideological positions. The application of CFLT to the text under review is apparent

when attempting to understand the unwritten tension resulting from the protagonist’s nervous

condition and her lapse into insanity. CFLT aids in comprehending why the protagonist merges

her identity with the phantoms fleeing the house and when incorporated into the textual analysis

of Gilman’s script provides a fuller review and theoretical grounding for assumptions authorizing

how the text is received and interpreted for this study.




                                                 12
                             CHAPTER 2. LINGUISTIC THEORIES

                                             Metaphor

       Recent scholarship and theories on metaphor reveal innovative ideas on cognitive

function in constructing the comparative overlay of conceptual domains to obtain meaning. As a

linguistic feature, metaphors are used in writing to suggest what is not directly addressed by the

author by using corresponding attributes. Megan Henricks Stotts (2021) argues metaphors can be

“recognized as indirect speech acts [and as] indirect directives that invite the hearer to engage in

open-ended comparison” and as a “pragmatic phenomenon” that does “something fundamentally

different” in the way it conveys information by emphasizing “what a speaker means . . . on a

particular occasion, rather than what the words themselves mean” (114-17).

       H. D. Adamson (2019) explains metaphor as a comparison “asking us to view one

[concept] in terms of the other” so that “metaphors provide a mapping across two concepts, one

of which contains features that are mapped onto corresponding features in the other concept”

(54). David Ritchie (2013) argues metaphors work by “focusing on the attributes of the vehicle

that are transferred to the topic” noting many attributes are “culturally associated with the

vehicle” (28). Zoltán Kövecses (2010) proposes a definition of metaphor as a conceptual domain

consisting of the source domain and the target domain with the “target domain [as] the domain

we try to understand through the source domain” (4). Kövecses adds, “conceptual metaphors

typically employ a more abstract concept as their target and a more concrete or physical concept

as their source,” noting “there is a set of systematic correspondences between the source and the

target in the sense that constituent conceptual elements of B correspond to the constituent

elements of A.” Kövecses refers to these conceptual correspondences as mappings (7). Kövecses

distinguishes between conceptual metaphor, defined as mentioned, and linguistic expression,



                                                 13
with the latter as one of context and concrete reference with words that “come from the language

or terminology of the more concrete conceptual domain” (4). Conceptual metaphors differ from

literary metaphors in their contextual approach to describing concrete phenomena. Nicholas

Asher and Alex Lascarides (2001) argue indirect speech acts are a “matter of interpretation,”

addressing the “communicative or semantic value of an utterance (192). The intentionality

behind a speaker’s utterance defines how metaphors work to convey a writer’s or speaker’s

meaning by alluding to something not directly addressed, as mentioned by Stotts. John Searle

(1993) notes “whenever we talk about the metaphorical meaning of a word, expression, or

sentence, we are talking about what a speaker might utter it to mean in a way that departs from

what the word, expression, or sentence actually means. We are, therefore, talking about possible

speaker’s intentions” (93). Searle (1979) posits intentionality as key to understanding metaphor

and as an indirect speech act performed by the speaker to “communicate to the hearer more than

he actually says by way of relying on their mutually shared background information . . . together

with the general powers of rationality and inference on the part of the hearer” (32).

       Searle defines indirect speech as “one illocutionary act performed indirectly by way of

performing another” (31-32). Jerrold Sadock (1979) notes, “Indirect speech acts are the most

important nonliteral figures of speech besides, of course, metaphor” resting their success on the

clash between what is done, what is said, and what is intended (46). Kent Bach and Robert

Harnish (1979) concur, offering extended explanation of indirect illocutionary acts as based on a

system of “mutual contextual beliefs” shared between people of “that which is said, that which is

done, and the intended relation between them” (66). In Gilman’s text, the physical structure of

the house mirrors social institutions such as marriage and contractual obligation in corresponding

attributes of enclosure and confinement to cognitively integrate the concepts.



                                                14
       Joseph Grady (1997) provides an explanation for what Gilman does in his article on

metaphor by relating physical structures (buildings) to social structures (theories), explaining

“The concern with experiential motivation is central to current cognitive linguistics. By showing

that these domains [theories] and [buildings] are actually related via two cognitive links which

do arise from experiential correlations we save an important generalization” (287). The

“generalization” mentioned by Grady regards cognitive integration of “submappings” derived

from individual experiential motivation (287). Grady proposes a “systematic” interdependence of

parts that compose separate domains as an organized form of association motivated by

experience (285). In other words, stored experience organizes association of characteristics

recognized in separate domains and fosters cognitive integration. Again, Grady notes an

important feature of metaphors are extensions that “encompass new concepts and elements

which do not appear to be part of the conventional range of the metaphor” (287).

       The emphasis on experiential correlation in Grady’s article indicates the importance of

understanding metaphor through “mutual contextual beliefs” introduced by Bach and Harnish.

Joanna Gavins (2007) explores ideas of a community’s culturally shared correlation of

experience in her work on internalized scripts and schemas in Text World Theory. Gavins

explains her theory this way “We construct mental representations, or text-worlds, which enable

us to conceptualize and understand every piece of language we encounter. . . . Human cognition

is structured around scripts: knowledge stores containing information about familiar types of

events and situations” (2-3). Gavins’ Text World Theory provides an example of holistic mental

models or analogues that act as mapped representations of human experience to enable

“inferences and predictions” about the world (4). In her study, Gavins notes, “crucially, our

ability to construct analogue mental models also enables us to experience events by proxy (4).



                                                 15
       Gavin’s explores how metaphor fits within Text World Theory in terms that are

reminiscent of the theory proposed by Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner (2001). In reference to

Fauconnier and Turner, Gavins notes, “The formulation of a coherent theory of conceptual

integration . . . has been of enormous benefit to Text World Theory,” positing a “close

relationship with contemporary theories” (148). Fauconnier and Turner describe the optimal

conditions of “conceptual integration” and “conceptual blending” as necessary to mental

cognition (18). In practice, their theory suggests that people fluidly merge or transpose their

experience of the world to bring together “elements of different domains” in a systematic

“compression” of events that condenses their interdependent experiences into a manageable

portfolio or schematic rubric (30). The central argument by Fauconnier and Turner resolves “that

conceptual integration interacts with cognitive activities like category assignment, analogy,

metaphor, framing, [and] metonymy” with “blending as a basic cognitive operation” (59). The

emphasis Gavins places on their theory of “blending” illustrates interactive mapping between

domains and conceptual integration of corresponding attributes residing in each domain.

Metonymy

       Similar to metaphor, metonymy relies on cognitive function to integrate concepts into an

analogical whole that relates a singular part to the encompassing whole represented by the part.

George Lakoff and Mark Johnson (1980) describe metonymy as “using one entity to refer to

another that is related to it” and synecdoche as “where the part stands for the whole” (35-36).

Metaphor and metonymy while related, are significantly different; metaphor conceives meaning

in terms of another unrelated concept to construe an original blending or integration of both

concepts that convene to form understanding. Metonymy has a referential function allowing

cognitive extension of the part described to the whole concept.



                                                 16
       Lakoff (1987) proposes an extraordinary theory of Idealized Cognitive Models (ICM)

that structure a mental space as described by Fauconnier where one concept expands to provide

relationship between two related parts (68). The idea of an ICM is helpful in understanding how

metonymy works to expand and extend a conceptual gestalt in relating a part to a whole, as in

this example by Kövecses: “We need a better glove at third base,” where glove stands for a better

baseball player (171). H. D. Adamson (2019) describes a variation of metonymy called

synecdoche that forms a “particular kind of conceptual metonymy often found in literature” (79).

Adamson’s example of this form of metonymy uses the rhetoric of “All hands on deck” where

“hands” stand for sailors and works as a representative part of the whole concept. Adamson notes

synecdoche can also reverse the representational process to where the whole is represented by a

specific part, as in the example, “the university has enacted a hiring freeze,” where university

represents the administration of the university (79). The essential characteristic of metonymy

requires referent attributes remain within one conceptual domain but, as René Dirven and Ralf

Pörings (2009) note, “In metonymy we perspectivise [sic] the given experiential area as one

domain matrix . . . incorporating ever more new elements” (89). The idea that one conceptual

domain offers “new elements” is explored by Sandra Handl and Hans-Jörg Schmid (2011), who

discuss the conventionality of metonymies. Handl and Schmid emphasize ways of “figurative

thinking are so entrenched speakers are no longer aware of it” complemented by “the cognitive

salience of attributes involved in the metonymical construal (85-86). Handl and Schmid frame

their argument of conceptual theory as “conventional patterns of figurative thinking [that] shape

not only the way we speak, but also how we conceptualize and experience the world and act

(86). In their emphasis on conventionality, Handl and Schmid note, “A conceptual metonymy

should be considered conventional if it is shared by the members of a speech community” and



                                                17
bears on “well-established ways of thinking” (88). In the narrative the theory of new elements

applies to the characterization of “John,” whose role as the husband of the protagonist

contextualizes him as a figure of authority in the larger construction of control.

       Narrative Gaps. Lars Bernaerts (2013) introduces narrative gaps as that which require

additional effort by readers to enable them to “see something else and make new narrative

connections” (2). Bernaerts argues that “narratives come into being through interaction between

minds and narrative gaps,” and writes, “there is profound awareness among theorists . . . [that]

the construction and interpretation of narratives as coherent wholes . . . require gaps, empty

spaces, and hidden information” (3). Bernaerts notes that literary scholars find in the

construction and interpretation of narrative that gaps are necessary to the dynamics between

reader and author to frame the text (5). In his introduction, Bernaerts argues narrative gaps

follow from what he terms a “cognitivist approach” that focuses on the “mental operations

required to comprehend narratives” (8). Bernaerts’s approach separates from other theories of

mind such as hermeneutical or structuralist in that the cognitivist approach focuses on

“the gap-filling process in both the brain . . . and the mind” (8), whereas the hermeneutic tries to

integrate the objective and subjective processing of the text (4). In contrast, the structuralist

approach circumvents subjective reading to instead emphasize the “distribution and structure of

textual gaps” (6). While Bernaerts prefers cognitivist theories on how readers comprehend text

and narrative, there are other theories that also contribute to the literary competence of the

reader. However, for brevity, this paper will focus solely on cognitive approaches to textual gaps

found in studies such as those by Richard Gerrig (2010). Gerrig defines narrative gap as the

“distinction between story, what is told and discourse, the manner in which it is told” (19).

Gerrig asserts “discourse opens a gap between what narration reveals and the underlying story,”



                                                  18
and he endorses an empirical position called “memory-based processing” (emphasis in original)

to suggest readers recruit information that “resonates” in their memories, interacting

“idiosyncratically” with the text (20-23). Gerrig’s theory of memory-based inferential processing

departs from Gavin’s “bounded” theory of schema and argues for the adaptability of individual

memory (22). Gerrig writes, “Such structures are . . . bounded, static and reasonably similar

across readers” advocating instead for the fluidity of memory-based processing to show how the

“elements of complex texts resonate through each reader’s memory to yield inferences” (24).

       The contrast in the respective theories of Gerrig and Gavin lies in how readers use

memory, experience, and schemas to encode inferences “supported by information that is readily

available from each reader’s memory” (22). While the memory-based approach allows readers to

be more fluid and selective in determining which samples of memory are used, the approach of

encoded schemas argued by Gavins tends to limit or restrict how readers react and interpret text.

In an interesting juxtaposition to the foregoing, H. Porter Abbott (2013) provides a different

understanding of narrative gaps, distinguishing between gaps that can be filled and the more

predominant type of narrative gap that cannot be filled. Abbott refers to textual gaps as a “guided

process in which we are not only cued to fill gaps in a certain way but also cued to leave other

gaps unfilled” (109). Abbott predicates his argument on the work of Wolfgang Iser (1974),

whose ideas on textual indeterminacy posited gaps as, “the very points at which the reader can

enter into the text . . . to configure the meaning of what he is reading” (40). Iser wrote narrative

gaps were essential components of any text and, further, no text could be known in its entirety

(40). In later work, Iser proposed gaps can be filled “in many different ways . . . and will always

remain open to some extent with one text . . . capable of several different realizations”

(1980:275).



                                                 19
       Iser argued “A literary text must therefore be conceived in such a way [that] it will

engage the readers’ imagination in the task of working things out for himself” (275). Meir

Sternberg (1978) concurs, writing, “every literary work opens a number of gaps that have to be

filled in by the reader” (50). However, Abbott argues Iser’s notion of gaps as “key points of

entry” fails in the way gaps “riddle narrative at all points” (emphasis in original), leading to how

gaps play a “critical part in narrative success” (109). In a novel blending of theories, Abbott

invokes the imaginative power of Ernest Hemingway’s “principle of the iceberg” to emphasize

“the art of leaving things out in such a way that they are still present” stressing the necessity of

the readers’ own “requisite depth of experience” (110). Abbott points to “egregious gaps” in

narrative requiring “immense inferential energy” and cites the contractual agreement among

authors and readers in which each “knows the rules of narrative” (110). The “contractual

agreement” noted by Abbott reflects Gilman’s dependence on the cooperation of readers to infer

meaning from gaps of unfilled narrative left deliberately open.




                                                  20
                      CHAPTER 3. HYPOTHETICAL WORLD THEORY

       Hypothetical World Theory (HWT) pertains to the “what if” possibilities in “The Yellow

Wallpaper.” The text presents numerous instances in which brief paragraphs and abrupt endings

open numerous possibilities of what could have taken place—if. An example of this is found in

the text when the narrator confesses, “John does not know how much I really suffer. He knows

there is no reason to suffer, and that satisfies him” (original emphasis 14). This segues into a

discussion of possible worlds theory in which reality is imagined in alternate forms by the

literary complicity of readers who bring their own experiential knowledge into the text. HWT

posits that readers have mental reserves of scripted scenes and flexible capacity to fill in the

missing narrative of a text. To put this into context, Raymond Bradley and Norman Swartz

(1979) propose people engage in counterfactual supposition to wonder “about things that might

have happened” (emphasis in original) and ask, “what if things had been thus?” (2).

       Bradley and Swartz argue that such “actuality is . . . surrounded by an infinite realm of

possibilities . . . by an infinity of other possible worlds,” and they present a plausible theory by

which to investigate the fiction of Charlotte Perkins Gilman (2). Jerome Bruner (1986) posits a

psycholinguistic approach to understanding how readers process language to derive multiple

meanings. Bruner explains how readers receive, understand, and process text, using various

subjective methods of decoding such as genre to categorically inform assignment. No “fixed”

method of interpretation impacts how the text is read and understood to replicate the fictional

world and its inherent possibilities in mirrored distortions of reality. Literary theorist Lubomír

Doležel (1998) addresses what he considers to be the incompleteness of fictional worlds,

remarking that “to construct a complete possible world would require writing a text of infinite

length” (794-95).



                                                  21
        Doležel posits this argument to justify the ontological nature of fictional worlds. The text

world created contains numerous possibilities of development that could exceed the author’s

intentions when engaged by the reader. Doležel explains this as “literary poesies” that transforms

writing into what did not exist before; “the world-constructing power of the fictional text implies

that the text is prior to the world, that it calls into existence and determines its structure” (790).

As Doležel claims, “Fictional texts . . . construct sovereign fictional worlds which satisfy the

human need for imaginative expanse, emotional excitement, and aesthetic pleasure” (792). HWT

serves the purpose of providing a theoretical basis for constructing speculative scenarios of

“what if” inhered in the narrative gaps of unmediated text created by Gilman. While discussion

of narrative gaps will be pursued later, it is relevant here as a means to explain how HWT works

to fill such gaps by using the power of individual cognitive processing to provide those

possibilities of what might have happened.

        Abbott argues the internal dynamics of fictional worlds require “the reader’s creative

engagement with the text” in order to configure the meaning of the text (108). The individual

authority of the reader to employ HWT allows them to establish relevancy, construct meaning,

and bridge textual omissions. The critical engagement of HWT establishes precedent for theories

of mind correlating cognitive models with internal scripts, subjective experience, and conceptual

integration networks that impose on the capacity of the reader to construct meaning. HWT

remains essential to fiction in general and to the fiction of “The Yellow Wallpaper” in particular

to provide a necessary means of interpretation. While much of HWT results from Kantian

(1908) philosophical speculation on the arcane and esoteric formulations of the mind with regard

to space and time, recent reviews reevaluate the operation of possible worlds in relation to the

actual world or the present temporal reality.



                                                   22
        Marie-Laure Ryan and Alice Bell (2019) advance the proposition that “In a many-worlds

ontology, fictional texts can be associated with worlds, these worlds can be imagined on the

basis of all the propositions presented as true by the text, and it is possible to distinguish true

statements about the members of particular fictional worlds” (3). Ryan and Bell hypothesize

fictional worlds where it is possible to distinguish truth to facilitate possibilities of an alethic

system, noting not only could things be different from what they are in reality but that things

“could be different in many different ways,” and propose that readers are enabled in a many-

worlds ontology to evaluate statements as either true or false by being given the option of more

than one possible world and outcome (3).

        Ryan posits an explicit difference between fictional worlds limited by relationship to the

text and storyworlds that encompass “totalities [of] space, time and individuated existents that

undergo transformations as the result of events” (63). Ryan’s characterization of storyworlds as

“networks of relations” concurs with David Herman’s (2009) conception of “global mental

representations enabling interpreters to frame inferences about situations, characters, and

occurrences explicitly mentioned or implied by a narrative text” (109). Interestingly, Herman

categorizes features other than text as “expressive resources,” adding emphasis to the text of

storyworlds in the disposition of space, section breaks, and typographic features (107). Jonathon

Evans, David Over, and Simon Handley (2003) discuss hypothetical thinking as a “uniquely

human faculty that is a distinguishing characteristic of our intelligence” (3). Evans, Over, and

Handley argue that hypothetical thinking comprises implicit “background beliefs and knowledge

. . . reflecting the learned history of the individual” that links to “language and reflective

consciousness” as a basis for reasoning (3).




                                                   23
        Echoing that theory, Bo Pettersson (2016) cites the ability for abstract thought as the

single most novel aspect of human cognition and “literary world-making” (9). Pettersson notes

the faculty of a cultural community or shared imagination bridging with individual imagination

and perceptions of reality to build a shared concept of meaning (28). Pettersson concludes “The

study of shared imagination and particularly literary imagination can provide tools for analyzing

. . . imaginative uses of literary representation” (40). Finally, Ruth Ronen (1994) examines the

representation of possible worlds in her study of a “heterogeneous paradigm that allows various

conceptions for possible modes of existence” and the commitment to an “alternate ontology”

(21). Ronen discusses the theoretic position pertaining to possible worlds that “non-actuality”

does not preclude . . . one’s ability to make propositions” and “possible worlds can account for

the links between the actual world and other worlds” (26). In describing the relative “autonomy”

of possible worlds, Ronen argues other worlds comprise not so much an alternate version of

reality as complete worlds with their own systematic set of possibilities characterized by

intentionality (28). Ronen’s assessment of possible worlds tallies well with what readers

encounter in fictional texts as the resulting gestalt of inference, intention, and complicity with the

author in its creation.




                                                 24
                                 CHAPTER 4. FEMINIST THEORY

        Critical Feminist Literary Theory (CFLT) has developed over time beginning with the

work of Mary Ellmann (1968), Kate Millitt (1970), and Germaine Greer (1971). Since then, there

has been a plethora of feminist commentary on women. Feminists have not been sparing in their

critique of literature, authors, and/or the impact of gender on texts and their interpretation.

        In this section, I examine a small sample of feminist literary critique as it may apply to

the text of “The Yellow Wallpaper” to expose the underlying bias of review brought to this

study. Feminist review reveals the inequity of social and marital relations arising from ingrained

ideas on gender and ascribed notions of women’s fragility in the critical assignment of authority

and autonomy. In Gilman’s text, social structures and institutions predicate subordinated

assumptions about women’s place in society that authorize a discursive feminist review. The

feminist commenters reviewed have reevaluated the political, social, and historical context of

women’s writing to critique the boundaries between the text and the world, and the text and the

reader. The application of the term feminist, irrespective of ideology, merits a review of who and

where the critic, the reader, and the writer are located politically, and influences interpretation.

Annette Kolodny (1996) reiterates an important observation in her analysis of feminist review:

“the feminist must oppose the painfully obvious truism that what is attended to in a literary work,

and hence what is reported about it, is often determined not so much by the work itself as by the

critical technique or aesthetic criteria through which it is filtered” (250). Kolodny acknowledges

the limitations adhering to a feminist review, writing, “all a feminist is asserting, then, is her own

right to liberate new . . .significances . . .and . . . her right to choose which features of a text she

takes as relevant” (250).




                                                   25
       Kolodny’s emphasis on the individuality of reading endorses the critical application of a

feminist ideology that supports many reviews. Charlotte Perkins Gilman authored her short story

on a wave of feminist sentiment that began, according to Estelle Freedman (2002), in 1848.

Freedman reviews the history of feminist politicization taking place in Europe and the United

States with new publications in France, La Voix des Femmes representing women’s voice, and

feminist conventions such as the one held in July of 1848 in Seneca Falls, New York. Gilman

was among those who wrote and published for a female readership, and she took an active part in

legislating for women’s political autonomy. Accordingly, it is fitting to apply a feminist theory

of review to her work with its allusions to women’s physical and ideological entrapment within

socialized conventions of marriage and authority. Certainly, there has been no paucity of

feminist reaction in the decades since the first publication appeared, followed by demands for

suffrage, education, and property rights. However, Freedman notes it was not until the Industrial

Revolution (1760-1840) widened the gap in wage earnings between men and women and a

radical reevaluation of economic opportunity created hierarchies of exclusion that women and

other non-privileged classes became dependent (46). Freedman’s description of the resulting

economic dependence of women may have contributed to their experience of anxiety.

       In her review, Freedman points out that the same conditions that engendered separate

spheres also gave women opportunities of expression through writing and organization (46). In

deference to the debate over superfluous pluralism, I propose to focus literary analysis of the text

in this study through a liberal or humanist framework guided by Mary Maynard’s (2006)

definition of liberal feminism as “individual rights . . . equality, justice, and equal opportunities”

as ways of achieving gender equity through political and legal reform (260). In that respect, the

feminists quoted follow a liberal ideological approach to issues of gender.



                                                  26
       Cora Kaplan (1996) makes a circuitous argument in her discussion of gender and genre,

but directly addresses the question of women as writers: “the mid-century saw the development

of a liberal ‘separate but equal’ argument which sometimes tangled with, sometimes included the

definition of women’s sphere and the development of the cult of true womanhood” (181). Kaplan

writes, “All the major women writers were both subject to and sensitive about charges of

coarseness. Sexual impurity was the unforgivable sin, the social lever through which Victorian

culture controlled its females” (164). Kaplan, in her address of women as writers in the

nineteenth century, notes the entry of literate women into the public discourse endangered

“taboos” of male prerogative and prejudice (164). In similar fashion, Josephine Donavan (2012)

examines the writing of Charlotte Perkins Gilman, recognizing her as being among the first wave

of cultural feminists with publications on the plight of women and social institutions. Donavan

notes that “Gilman’s The Home remains one of the most clearly articulated pieces of radical

feminist theory on the domestic sphere produced during the first wave of feminist thought” (48).

       Rosemarie Tong (2014) presents a comprehensive review on the diversity of feminist

thinking, beginning with the liberal approach to social reformation. Tong argues the “classic

formulation” of liberal feminism began in the women’s suffrage movement and in women’s

groups such as the National Organization of Women. Tong recognizes organizations such as

these as responsible for rhetoric rooting female subordination in a “set of customary and legal

constraints that block women’s entrance to and success in the so-called public world” (2).

Tong writes “to the extent that society holds the false belief that women are, by nature, less

intellectually and physically capable than men, it tends to discriminate against women in the

academy, the forum, and marketplace” (2). Tong argues liberal ideology requires the rules of the

game to be fair for everyone and the distribution of goods and services inclusive of those who



                                                 27
are systemically disadvantaged. Tong states, “women should have as much chance to succeed in

the public realm as men do” (9). In advance of Rosemarie Tong, Gilman expressed her feminist

attitude in 1903 in her book, The Home: Its Work and Influence:

       We have always assumed that the woman could do most by staying at home. Is this so?

       Can we prove it? Why is that which is so palpably false of a man is held to be true of a

       woman? The home in its arrested state of development, does not properly fulfill its own

       essential functions—much less promote the social ones. . . . Among the splendid

       activities of our age it lingers on. . . . It hinders, by keeping woman a social idiot. (314).

Due to extensive divisions within the broad overview of feminist theory, it is useful to have an

operative definition for the particular focus used in this study. Mary Maynard (1995) offers her

opinion, writing, “Liberal feminism is depicted as focusing on individual rights and on concepts

of equality, justice and equal opportunities, where legal and social policy changes are seen as

tools for engineering women’s equality with men” (260). Gilman’s fictional tale takes on new

facets of meaning when reviewed through the lens of liberal feminist ideology, revealing new

perspectives on women’s marital experience. Gilman’s subjective experience of marriage and

male authority may resonate with some women while others reject it; however, as leading

feminist authors and critics such as, Beate Schöpp-Schilling (1975), Susan Wendell (1987),

Mary Eagleton (1986), Cheris Kramarae (1992), Susan Marilley (1996), Estelle Freedman

(2002), and Rosemarie Tong (2013) have noted, the evidence suggests women are vulnerable to

and mindful of inequitable social and economic relationships. Liberal feminism stresses

rationality as a fundamental human attribute, and, as Alison Jaggar (1983) argues, “Liberal

political theory ground[s] on the conception of human beings as essentially rational agents.” (28)

an understanding that informs proponents of liberal feminism.



                                                 28
       In Gilman’s narrative, it is precisely this rationality that is called into question as the

protagonist slowly loses her grip on reality and succumbs to the seductive lure of madness that

eventually mirrors back to her in her own image as the woman caught behind the yellow

wallpaper. Questions of rationality underscore more than the idea of madness that afflicts the

protagonist; rational actions and thoughts reflect the criteria held by society and the medical

community in their assessment and treatment of women’s nervous conditions and in diagnoses of

hysteria. It can be no coincidence that Gilman’s treatment for “nervous exhaustion” by a

respected member of the medical community resulted in her writing a self-explicatory tale of

resentment and resistance to ideas about women’s physical and mental capacities. Feminist

women’s groups responded by pointing to the underlying inequity incurred in social institutions

such as marriage, domesticity, and education that restrained women’s progress into the public

domain of discourse and commerce. In Gilman’s fiction, it is these circumstances that compel the

protagonist to seek relief when her physician/husband John threatens to send her to a specialist

“who is just like John and my brother, only more so!” (19). Historian Mark Micale (1995) notes

hysteria represented, “everything men found irritating or irascible, mysterious or unmanageable”

in women, mirroring their “irrational, capricious and unpredictable nature” (68). Peter Brooks

(1993) concurs, writing, “Hysteria . . . was conceived to be a female malady . . . held to be the

result of a wandering womb whose displacement had to be corrected to effect a cure” (224).

       Edith Gomberg and Violet Franks (1979) argue “physicians that treated hysterics were

ambivalent at best, but usually caustic and punitive. Because women did not fulfill their female

roles, they threatened physicians as professionals and as men” (361). Elaine Showalter (2020)

revisits the history of research into women’s diagnoses of hysteria, noting, “nineteenth-century

physicians generally believed that hysterical women were skillful performers, faking their



                                                  29
symptoms in order to get attention and special treatment” (29). The discursive canon of literature

on what Beret Strong (1998) refers to as la condition feminine has drawn comment far too broad

for this venue; however, as Gomberg and Franks note, Gilman provides “the first description of

the relationship between the psychiatrist and madness” and on how “the paternalistic collusion

between the psychiatrist and the physician—husband destroyed the protagonist” (360).




                                                30
                                        CHAPTER 5. ANALYSIS

        Gilman, a noted feminist, and leading activist for women’s rights, wrote a piece of fiction

that paralleled her experience as a married woman who received medical advice for melancholy.

The result of her consultation proved disastrous for Gilman due to the dismissal of her complaint

by a physician who diagnosed women’s complaints as symptomatic of hysteria. Gilman’s fiction

reflects her resistance to that diagnosis, and she styles her central character as her personal avatar

with a focus on the relationship between her unnamed narrator and her husband, John. Gilman

describes John as a respected physician with an authoritative presence in the home who decides

to dismiss his wife’s ailment subjectively and professionally. The other characters in the text

remain peripheral with exception of the female phantoms who emerge from behind the wallpaper

to seek freedom from their metaphorical prison. Importantly, the plot centers on the protagonist’s

isolation, the relational inequity she experiences, the social stigmatization of women’s nervous

disorders as hysteria, and the protagonist’s subtle transition to insanity as a last means of escape.

        A recurrent theme of madness reiterates throughout with emphasis on the wallpaper as an

instigating agent of opposition to women restrained by its animus. The main ideas supported by

the text revolve around women’s subjugation to social institutions of authority such as marriage

and the contractual obligations those institutions impose on women, the diminution of women as

rational beings, and representation of physical structures such as the home and/or the wallpaper

as metaphorical enclosures that mimic the authority of those social institutions. The narrative’s

structural elements are metaphorical and/or metonymical, aided by narrative gaps and omissions

of silence that disconcert the readers’ expectation of fulfillment and open alternative possibilities

of reality.




                                                 31
       It is in Gilman’s critical decision to create gaps of unnarrated possibility that “alethic

modalities” draw from the experiential perspective brought by readers (Ryan 239). Gilman’s

visual metaphors image feminist structures that traditionally are assigned to represent the

feminine sphere such as the home, gardens, and children. The structural aspect of her writing

takes form in the nursery, where her protagonist discovers within its barred enclosure a means of

escape from the husband’s authority. Hypothetical World Theory reveals the inherent

possibilities of alternative realities residually dormant in Gilman’s text like visual afterimages

readers can use to expand on what is missing in the text to obtain closure and fulfill expectations.

The fictional world created in text borders between sanity and madness, merging the actual

world with the possible world of fiction. Gilman’s primary structural component of the house

contains a nursery room lined with a molting yellow wallpaper whose:

        sprawling flamboyant pattern commit every artistic sin. It is dull enough to confuse the

       eye in following, pronounced enough to constantly irritate and provoke study, and when

       you follow the lame uncertain curves for a little distance, they commit suicide—plunge

       off at outrageous angles, destroy themselves in unheard of contradictions. (13)

Gilman’s description of the yellow wallpaper in her story, animated by the imagination of her

protagonist, assumes form and substance to become a physical entity that stalks its inhabitants.

Readers assume the possibility of the supernatural to engage the gothic reality of an inanimate

object that “creeps all over the house . . . hovering in the dining room, skulking in the parlor, and

hiding in the hall” (28-29). The elastic credulity of the readers’ imagination is tested when

Gilman positions her protagonist, who is enmeshed in a burgeoning madness, to subjectify the

forms emerging out of the wallpaper into angry women fleeing their imprisonment.




                                                 32
       Gilman verifies the growing apprehension of her readers that her avatar/protagonist

identifies with them, writing, “I really have discovered something at last . . . I have finally found

out. The front pattern really does move—and no wonder! The woman behind shakes it!” (30). In

Gilman’s possible world, the thin divide between the animate and inanimate converge to form an

ontological fiction that by necessity is marked by what Doležel calls “irrecoverable lacunae”

(795). Gilman applies theories of possibility to her incomplete construction of fictional worlds to

form an alethic alternative developed in complicity with the reader and the text and writes her

characters into existence much as the fiction of the wallpaper writes its emerging phantoms into

the mind of the protagonist. What Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1847) describes as a poetic state of

mind “sufficient to procure for these shadows of imagination that willing suspension of disbelief

for the moment” assumes central importance as a cognitive theory of mind aiding assimilation of

the supernatural world and creating access to multiple levels of processing text (2). The idea

behind this theory rests on the way readers assign meaning to a text using cognitive processes.

       Gilman accomplishes such distortions by assigning animated qualities of form, function,

and purpose to the wallpaper in such a way that it becomes a living entity in and of itself to mime

the controlling enclosure of the domestic sphere. The possibility of women held prisoner within

its enclosure adds to conceiving it in malignant terms. Indeed, as Gilman writes, “It is the

strangest yellow, that wallpaper! It makes me think of all the yellow things I ever saw—not

beautiful ones like yellow buttercups, but old foul, bad yellow things” (28). In the narrative, the

yellow wallpaper becomes an omnipresent being who commands the attention of the woman

forced to remain in its presence by a husband who commands her obedience. The reality of the

wallpaper as a changing, ever present influence can be seen in this excerpt by Gilman, “This

paper looks to me as if it knew what a vicious influence it had! I never saw so much expression



                                                 33
in an inanimate thing before” (16). The latitude of literary interpretation allowed by cognitive

theories of mind expands the text beyond what may have been the author’s intention, allowing

readers to subjectively rewrite the text using scripts of experiential memory. The flexibility of

the subjective reading experience allows readers to imagine multiple outcomes. The main points

taken are that fictional worlds contain the seeds of their own germination into relevant worlds of

meaning for different readers who bring into the text their own priorities; and, as Bruner argues,

the focus on psycholinguistic theory depends on the cognitive apprehension of language as

“speech acts” that inflect meaning and reference (5). Fauconnier and Turner propose an

interesting argument, claiming the capacity for humanities imagination furthers the social

evolution of the species and allows individuals, “greater power of conception and choice” (217).

       Gilman assigns that power to the reader, who needs to decide the credible possibility or

veracity of the mind of a madwoman who sees forms within the wallpaper, forms that emerge to

creep into the shadows of nearby “blackberry vines” (31). In a hypothetical world, such things

could happen without the cognitive dissonance that accompanies perception in the actual world,

that allows extraordinary experiences to happen. Gilman’s text is extraordinary as she describes

the woman who exits from the wallpaper, “I have watched her sometimes away off in the open

country, creeping as fast as a cloud shadow in a high wind” (31). The hysterical madness of the

protagonist resonates throughout the text creating an atmosphere of heightened tension,

       Hurrah! This is the last day, but it is enough. Jennie wanted to sleep with me—the sly

       thing! I told her I should undoubtedly rest better for a night alone. That was clever, for

       really I wasn’t alone a bit! As soon as it was moonlight and that poor thing began to

       shake the pattern, I got up and ran to help her. I pulled and she shook, I shook and she

       pulled, and before morning we had peeled off yards of that paper. (32)



                                                 34
       In the story, the protagonist finds relief by peeling off the wallpaper to release the woman

held inside by its stultifying influence and pungent odor. The madness induced by the wallpaper

on the imagination of the protagonist allows her a way to slip past sanity and past the barred

windows of the nursery room to escape an intolerable situation. At the time Gilman wrote her

story, women were still assessed as fragile in comparison to the robust rationality of men that

entitled them access to the public domain; indeed, Gilman’s protagonist is kept under scrutiny

and protective custody within the prison of her home. It is the character of imprisonment that

influences the events that follow, causing Gilman’s protagonist to write, “He is very careful and

loving, and hardly lets me stir without special direction” (12). Gilman’s text reflects conditions

under which some women were restrained to hide the nervous conditions that resulted in their

medical diagnoses of hysteria. Indeed, as Mitchel Weir (1877) would later write, “For some

years I have been using . . . methods of renewing the vitality of feeble people by a combination

of entire rest and of excessive feeding. The cases thus treated have been chiefly women of the

class known to every physician, nervous women” (9).

       Weir’s critique and opinion was still quite common among physicians in the late

nineteenth century and, at the time Gilman was writing, were guided by years of medical

tradition reflecting, as Laurinda Dixon (1995) notes, “ancient medical belief[s] in the innate

instability of the female sex . . .reinforcing traditional notions concerning women’s societal roles

and intellectual capabilities” (3). In the narrative, Gilman portrays her protagonist as considered

vulnerable to whimsical fancies. “John has cautioned me not to give way to fancy in the least. He

says that with my imaginative power and habit of story-making, a nervous weakness like mine is

sure to lead to all manner of excited fancies” (16). The portrayal substantiates Dixon’s notion of

“the fragile . . . . housebound woman [who] has always been a reflection more of male wish



                                                 35
fulfillment than of female reality” (3). In “The Yellow Wallpaper,” hysteria parades as a

madness that verges on obliteration as the heroine seeks escape by merging with the women

exiting the wallpaper. They are hysterical, aggravated by the grief of their imprisonment; they

creep into the margins of oblivion aided by a hysterical heroine who remains imprisoned behind

the barred windows of the nursery room itself held captive by the yellow wallpaper. Gilman’s

tale of madness and female hysteria is central to a feminist reading, understanding, and

perception of hysteria as a “performance,” that discredits its legitimacy and reduces its victim to

an unreliable actor.

       Gilman is aware of this when she writes, “If a physician of high standing, and one’s own

husband, assures friends and relatives that there is really nothing the matter with one but

temporary nervous depression—a slight hysterical tendency—what is one to do?” (10). Gilman’s

treatment of hysteria locates the logic of its devastating consequences in the incipient madness

that overwhelms the protagonist, who retreats from her husband’s society and legitimates her

escape from his authority. If Showalter is correct, then Gilman writes hysteria as a performative

quest for attention. Indeed, DSM-III (1980) states the following:

       The essential feature is a Personality Disorder in which there are overly dramatic,

       reactive, and intensely expressed behavior characteristic disturbances in interpersonal

       relationships. Individuals with this disorder are lively and dramatic and are always

       drawing attention to themselves. Minor stimuli give rise to emotional excitability, such as

       irrational, angry outbursts or tantrums. Individuals with this disorder crave novelty,

       stimulation, and excitement and quickly become bored with normal routines. Flights into

       romantic fantasy are common; in both sexes overt behavior often is a caricature of

       femininity. In other classifications this category is termed Hysterical Personality. (314)



                                                 36
        In a successful contrast of masculine logic and female sensitivity, the heroine declares,

“there is something strange about the house—I can feel it. I even said so to John one moonlit

evening, but he said what I felt was a draught, and shut the window” (11, original emphasis).

Gilman’s adept characterization of John’s dismissive attitude towards his wife’s nervous

condition leads to his infantilization of her and shows in his condescension the passage, “‘What

is it, little girl? Don’t go walking about like that—you’ll get cold.’ . . . ‘Bless her little heart!’

said he with a big hug, ‘she shall be as sick as she pleases!’” (23-24). As Gilman’s protagonist

slips deeper into her psychotic diagnosis, she remarks, “Life is so much more exciting now than

it used to be. You see I have something to look forward to, to watch. I really do eat better, and I

am more quiet than I was” (27). The “overactive imagination” Gilman assigns her victim

becomes her salvation even as it becomes a resource she can use in her sphere of domestic

enclosure (15).

        Hysteria, when reviewed through feminist ideology, reconfigures itself as a feminine

resource predicating on established ideas about women as weak and susceptible and provides

women with a medically authenticated excuse to escape. The feminist perspective of hysteria is

fractured, at once prescriptive and performative, and when read through the feminist lens it

becomes a condemnation and a resource of survival. It is this contradictory nature of hysteria that

while considered by the DSM-III to be a “feminine characteristic” can also affect men. Feminist

perspective does not exclude the consideration of men in its calculus of equity and when applied

to Gilman’s fiction can be used to review the role of the stalwart, rational physician assigned to

John as equally susceptible to hysteria. If the theory of hypothetical worlds and alternate

possibilities can be trusted to interpret or provide other explanations for what occurs within

fictional worlds such as Gilman’s, then it is possible to suggest that John, too, is affected by the



                                                   37
pervasive influence of the yellow wallpaper. Indeed, as Gilman writes, “I have watched John

when he did not know I was looking, and come into the room suddenly on the most innocent

excuses, and I’ve caught him several times looking at the paper!” (27). Gilman casts John’s

character as impervious to irrational actions or thoughts, but in his reaction to his wife’s slide

into madness there is the possibility that John, too, becomes hysterical when he sees his wife

crawling around the floor of the nursery room:

       He stopped short by the door. “What is the matter?” he cried, “For God’s sake, what are

       you doing!” I kept on creeping just the same, but I looked at him over my shoulder. “I’ve

       got out at last,” said I, “in spite of you and Jane! And I’ve pulled off most of the paper, so

       you can’t put me back! Now why should that man have fainted? But he did, and right

       across my path by the wall, so that I had to creep over him every time! (36)

The incidence of male hysteria was discussed and documented by leading medical practitioners

in Europe and England throughout the nineteenth century. Sigmund Freud (1886) presented a

paper on male hysteria before the Viennese Society of Physicians that was built on the work and

established theories of Jean-Martin Charcot’s (1877) Leçons sur les Maladies du Système

Nerveux, Paul Briquet’s (1859) Traité clinique et thérapeutique de l’Hystérie, and Moritz

Benedikt’s (1868) Elekteotherapie. In England, Herbert William Page (1883) documented

evidence of hysteria in the “deplorable state which patients of both sexes, men not less frequently

than women, present when suffering with this condition” (172). Henri Ellenberger (1970) delves

into the history of male hysteria, writing, “since many accident victims were men, the diagnosis

of male hysteria, formerly restricted to men with classical symptoms, was now extended to men

with functional, posttraumatic disorders. . . . In Vienna, the existence of classical male hysteria

was no longer questioned” (439).



                                                 38
        Mark Micale (2008), in his review of male hysteria, writes, “The notion that men were as

susceptible as women to hysterical pathology ran counter to prevailing patriarchal ideals and

seemed to entail the need for a substantially revised understanding of masculine human nature”

(193). Feminist logic would assume any medically recognized disorder such as hysteria, when

shared equally across gender, would alleviate the stigmatization associated with it, thereby

removing its “feminine characteristic” from review. The discourse on hysteria aside, feminist

perspective on the plight of the heroine/victim in Gilman’s fiction requires explanation and a

review of her projected fantasies onto the yellow wallpaper. As even the most superficial

feminist review reveals, Gilman has created a situation in which any woman, let alone someone

with a nervous disorder, might experience an irrational reaction. The situation in which the

heroine/victim finds herself places her in immediate danger of relapsing into a separate fantasy

world apart from the actual reality of her contractual obedience and marital obligation. The

central objective of the protagonist is relief from a situation she considers intolerable and, given

her creative proclivity, she projects her unhappiness onto forms of women in the wallpaper (17).

        Analysis of Gilman’s fiction through the perspective of feminist theory asserts arguments

impacting the way the story is read and understood as a woman’s relational experience in a social

culture where approbated forms of institutional authority derive from men. The disadvantages of

this are apparent in the domestic inhibitions recognized by the protagonist as a means of control,

as when Gilman writes, “I get unreasonably angry with John sometimes. I’m sure I never used to

be so sensitive. I think it is due to this nervous condition. But John says if I feel so, I shall

neglect proper self-control; so I take pains to control myself—before him at least” (11). Feminist

theory recognizes control as antithetical to an equitable relationship for women, providing the

reason for the reaction and resistance of the protagonist to look for a means of escape.



                                                   39
        The metaphors in Gilman’s text allow readers to fashion cognitive connections that draw

from their own experience and enable them to connect physical structures such as the home and

wallpaper with social institutions that enclose women in contractual obligations such as marriage

and domesticity. While such interpretations rely on the use of a feminist ideology, the literary

metaphors do incline toward perceiving the heroine as a woman trapped by the conventions and

expectations of conforming behavior society imposes. Metaphor relies on overlap, extension, and

grouping of characteristics recognized in correspondents represented in conceptual domains; the

idea that “correspondents” must be recognized and identified successfully suggests possibility of

a breach where the metaphor fails to perform as anticipated. The example used by Kövecses,

“LIFE IS A JOURNEY,” therefore, relies on the cultural understanding of life as a journey taken. The

useful effect of metaphor remains culturally and temporally indebted to recognition of certain

constructs in any given society in which they are allocated meaningful attribution and are

understood as such within that cultural community of shared symbolic meaning. Gilman invites

that intersubjective comparison in her use of the home and wallpaper as symbolic of restraint.

        Gilman’s characterization of the yellow wallpaper invests it as living entity with purpose

when she writes, “This paper looks to me as if it knew what a vicious influence it had! I get

positively angry with the impertinence of it and the everlastingness. But in places where it isn’t

faded and where the sun is just so, I can see a strange, provoking, formless figure” (16-18). The

conceptual metaphor here expresses the idea of the wallpaper as animated and, while different

interpretations can be formed according to the readers’ own subjective experience, conception of

restraint is explicitly perceived by the protagonist as a willful entity that restrains the figures

within its grasp. The wallpaper becomes a substitute for the enclosing conditions of the home

and marriage that contain the protagonist and, by extension, the formless figures of other women.



                                                   40
The wallpaper then is conceived of as a material force of opposition corresponding to structured

enclosures as a form of restraint used against women.

Table 1. The Yellow Wallpaper is an Animate Force of Opposition
Source: Yellow Wallpaper                     Target: Animated Entity

Design and Pattern                           Animus/Influence

Faded Paper                                  Visions/Imaginary Forms

Cross-Hatched Lines                          Constraint/Imprisonment

Opposition                                   Resistance

Foul Odor                                    Decay/Death/Disintegration

Putrid Color                                 Enveloping Miasma/Encroaching/Invasive

Gilman’s example of the wallpaper is retained in its color, odor, and patterns as a palpable form
of restraint that maps onto the concept of a prison with similar sensorial sensations and function.


       The metaphor uses the concept of the wallpaper as a “vicious influence” to impress the

idea that the willfulness of the wallpaper mimics intentional abrogation of women’s freedom by

restricting their authority as rational actors, and it becomes an oppositional force against the will

of those it holds captive evolving into a prison. The protagonist’s uneasy premonition expresses

her recognition of the wallpaper as a physical restraint coinciding with her own intangible sense

of entrapment, as when she writes, “Dear John! . . . I tried to have a real earnest talk with him the

other day and tell him how I wish he would let me go and visit Cousin Henry and Julia” (21).

The longing expressed by the protagonist to get away from her current situation is rebuked by the

authority of her husband who declines to allow her to leave.




                                                 41
Table 2. Colonial Mansion is Representative of a Social Institutional Structure

Source: Colonial Mansion                              Target: Socio-Institutional Structure


Enforces Physical Isolation                           Enforces Social Isolation


Domesticity of Structure                              Domesticity of Control and Isolation


Assigned Home                                         Assigned Separate Sphere/Ideological Cult
                                                      of True Womanhood (Purity/Piety)

Barred Windows/Prison                                 Containment/Control/ Restraint/Opposition
                                                      (Resistance) (Resentment)

Marital Bed                                           Social/Institutional Sanction of Marital
                                                      Rights

The table above represents corresponding elements in separate domains that map conceptually
from concrete structures on the left to hypothesized ones on the right. The table represents the
element of enclosure that is present in both the physical structure of the home and in social
institutions that mimic its purpose as an isolating and controlling enclosure.

          Gilman’s literary metaphors allow the association of separate and distinct domains by

representing elements within the domains that correspond and have similar characteristics. An

example of metaphor from the text relies on the construct of the home as an enclosed domestic

sphere that separates women from public discourse and constrains women’s public aspirations.

The home as a controlled enclosure maps onto corresponding elements in marriage as a situation

in which women are enclosed, restrained, and controlled, and as table two shows, represents an

enclosure of restraint that is present in both the home and in aspects of social institutions. A third

metaphor lies in the way the character of John is written as a dominant authority in the home and

representative of the social institutions that support his authority and from which he derives his

status.



                                                 42
        The authority that adheres to John as both physician and husband anchors in the bedrock

of formal institutions such as medicine and marriage that preclude challenge and rematerialize as

forces of opposition the heroine contends against. Authority is represented in physical form as

John, and conceptually, in the formal institutions that exert control over lesser men and women

by demonstrating how the correspondent of control is present in each domain.

Table 3. John Represents Social, Domestic, and Institutional Control and Authority

Source: John                                      Target: Social, Institutional, Domestic
                                                  Control and Authority/Rational Actor
Physician                                         Elevated Social Status/Credibility


Husband                                           Domestic, Legal, and Political Authority


White Middle and Upper-Class Men                 Visibility/Public Figure/Socially Sanctioned
                                                 Status/ Institutional Standing and
                                                 Recognition
Gilman’s characterization of John as a physician/ husband imbues him with the institutional
authority to make unilateral decisions in regard to his wife, her health, and her property.


        The issue of control appears when the heroine/victim describes her situation to the reader

and asks, “But what is one to do?” and in comments on the need to hide her writing she remarks,

“I did write for a while in spite of them; but it does exhaust me a good deal—having to be so sly

about it, or else meet with heavy opposition” (10). Control is evidenced in John’s presumption to

make unilateral decisions concerning his wife, “John says that if I don’t pick up faster he shall

send me to Weir Mitchell in the fall” (33). The heroine’s casual comment indicates her consent is

not needed. In Gilman’s hypothetical world the metaphor of the woman/victim/heroine who

engages the opposition of controlling authority, whether it is represented physically as her

husband or more abstractly by the social institutions that legislate control, results in her

resistance to that authority.

                                                  43
       The metaphor of control works because representation of resistance configured in the

woman maps onto ideas of resistance configured in the opposition to social institutions that

demand compliance.

Table 4. Feminist Resistance to Social and Political Control

Source: Women’s Social Movement                    Target: Social and Political Institutions


White Middle and Upper-Class Women                 Resistance to Institutional and Political
                                                   Hierarchies of Exclusion/Conforming Social
                                                   Expectations of Marital Performance

       It may be Gilman’s feminist formulation of her fictional storyworld serves to inform and

represent the greater ideology of the women’s movement in their opposition and resistance to

subjection. The corresponding element recognized in Gilman’s fiction as resistance can be

mapped onto the resistance of the women’s social movement in its bid for recognition and

equity. The woman/victim/heroine written into Gilman’s fiction corresponds in kind with the

social movement of feminist resistance to the institutionalized authority of white men. Metaphors

involve extension and what H. D. Adamson refers to as, “mapping features not part of the source

concept proper but only part of the background cognitive model in which the source concept is

embedded” as a smaller part of a complex model of associated characteristics that extends the

original metaphor to include those related aspects (75). This constellation of related aspects

coalesce to form a representative whole that takes the “conceptual metaphor in a new direction”

(73). Extension relates metaphors in the text when Gilman writes, “Such a peculiar odor too! If I

turn my head suddenly and surprise it—there is that smell! It is not bad at first, and very gentle,

but quite the subtlest, most enduring odor I ever met . . . The only thing I can think of that it is

like it is the color of the paper! A yellow smell” (29).




                                                  44
       In the case quoted, the wallpaper, as the source domain, maps the visual element of color

as odor onto the more abstract target domain of intangible sensations where both are connected

by extension of associated characteristics. Gilman’s example of extension represents two distinct

domains, color and odor; offering a novel approach to metaphor by using elements of sensory

perception. Adamson explains a second aspect of metaphor he terms elaboration that works by

“expanding on and supplying details about an aspect of a source domain that is commonly

mapped onto a target domain,” (76). Gilman does this when she elaborates on the wallpaper

writing, “The wallpaper . . . is torn off in spots, and it sticketh closer than a brother” (17). The

elaborated metaphor of the wallpaper sticking to the wall and that of brothers sticking together

works by sharing a common element of attachment as an associated characteristic that exists both

in the wallpaper and in the domain of siblings. In another instance, Gilman extends the rage of

the heroine/victim to the ethereal women who exit from the wallpaper as elaboration of the rage

and insanity that possesses her where it becomes symptomatic of both the real and the unreal.

       A second linguistic strategy, metonymy, associates closely with metaphor, referencing an

aspect or part of the same conceptual domain of the thing or person to represent the whole.

Metonymy can be thought of as an inductive process that reasons from one example of reference

to implicate the entire concept, such as when Gilman images John as indicative of male

authority. Gilman imbues John’s role in the home and in the medical profession with authority,

linking him by dint of metonymic extension to nineteenth-century white men as their

representative. Both the husband and brother of the protagonist represent figures of authority as

individual examples of authority and control in domestic and public space. In another instance,

Gilman’s metonymical fiction represents the woman/victim fighting for her sanity as a singular

instance of the larger women’s social reform movement fighting to restore relational equity.



                                                  45
        A third instance of metonymy occurs when the form within the wallpaper takes on a

distinctly feminine shape who shakes angrily at the bars of her prison as reference to other

women similarly trapped, including the protagonist and possibly Gilman herself. Similarly, the

“colonial mansion,” represents a culture that came to define the lives, and occupations of women

(9). John’s role and character in the story can be contextualized both as metaphorical, in that he

is written as representative of social institutions that politically, and systemically diminish

women’s authority, and as metonymic of the presumed authority imbued to white men. In the

latter, John represents the stereotypical white male professional who has an attitude of privilege

and arrogance. John’s assumption of authority contrasts with the heroine’s valiant effort to assert

herself, typecasting his role in the story as overbearing—a presumption that may be typical of his

class or indeed, the literary license of the author.

        In either case, John’s character suggests authority. In the second example, Gilman writes

feminine forms into the wallpaper that desperately seek to find a way out from their prison, a

prison the heroine contrives from the pattern imprinted on the wallpaper. Gilman’s graphic

description contextualizes the wallpaper metaphorically as a prison within the prison of the

house and, as a metonym representative of enclosure. The internment of feminine forms within

the crosshatching of the wallpaper pattern suggests the suffrage of women and the surrender of

their freedom. The wallpaper becomes symbolic of women’s separation from public life and

imagined captivity in the home as well as women’s repressed anger toward their guards/captors.

The drafting of the wallpaper as a barrier demonstrates the private seclusion that encumbered

women’s domestic lives. Notably, the wallpaper in form and function takes on the guise of a

living entity to haunt the protagonist in her home. As such, the portrayal of the wallpaper

exemplifies the gothic influence that styled women’s writing.



                                                  46
       The same gothic reference extends to the “colonial mansion” mentioned in the text as the

type of home that invites gracious living with extended gardens and walkways. The house tends

to suggest other homes representing the lifestyle of white upper-class society patrons, such as

lawyers and physicians, who could afford to rent or own such homes. The final example of

metonymy occurs with the characterization of the protagonist as a woman driven to insanity by

the combined opposition of her husband and the institutions that supported his authority over her.

The depression she endures as a result of her dependence on him and her acknowledged place

within the hierarchy of social and institutional power locates her among other women who also

experienced displacement and diminution because of their gender. John’s role as a member of

that elite class who commands authority contrasts vividly with the role written for the heroine,

who typifies the quiet reservation of domestic women who lived quietly in the shadow of their

husbands. The submission experienced by the heroine in the story can be extended to represent

the experience of other women who had demands placed upon them in the marital relationship.

Although the physician/husband transgress the normative conduct of most men, so, too, does the

example of the protagonist; yet both become symbols in metonymic representation.

       Narrative gap is a literary device writers use to their advantage and Gilman’s use of it

allows readers to hypothesize what could have happened in her story when she fails to disclose

that information. Narrative gaps are textual omissions of occurrences that have happened and are

a part of the story, but which remain undisclosed to the reader. Gilman illustrates an example of

a narrative lapse when she ends her first paragraph, “There comes John, and I must put this

away—he hates to have me write a word.” The narrator fails to disclose why this is important or

what could have precipitated the edict against her writing. The next paragraph begins with, “We

have been here two weeks, and I haven’t felt like writing before, since that first day” (13).



                                                 47
       The gap in between what happened in the prior two weeks is left open to the reader’s

imagination. The scene, as it is written, becomes a poignant space of untold narrative and a time

in which something has occurred, but is left abruptly unsaid. In another instance, Gilman writes,

“There’s sister on the stairs!” and, just as before, Gilman ends her paragraph leaving the reader

to imagine or construct some meaning to its importance (18). In the next paragraph, Gilman

writes, “Well the Fourth of July is over!” Again, something has occurred in the interval but left

untold, leaving the reader to fill in the missing narrative (18). In another example of a narrative

gap, Gilman suddenly introduces an infant without any preamble to alert the reader writing, “Of

course it is only nervousness. It does weigh on me so not to do my duty in any way! . . . Nobody

would believe what an effort it is to do what little I am able—to dress and entertain, and order

things. It is fortunate Mary is so good with the baby. Such a dear baby!” (14). In this first of two

references to a child, Gilman declines to explain whose child it is, how the child figures into the

text, or what happened prior to this cursory introduction or, later, what becomes of the child.

Indeed, the name “Mary” occurs only once, without prior introduction or explanation.

       Yet another instance occurs with the transition of the protagonist into the madness that

engulfs her sanity; the process has been gradual, but definitive. While Gilman carefully relates

the protagonist’s obsession with the pattern and design of the wallpaper, there is no account of

how or why she slips into the conviction that women exist behind its façade. The reader is left to

infer from what has been written that it is the protagonist who sees herself as trapped, but the

narrative fails to make this hypothesis clear or to confirm it and, instead, requires the reader to

resolve the absence of information. An example occurs in reference to a “rope” the protagonist

secures and for the first time the protagonist declares, “I wonder if they all came out of that

wallpaper as I did? But I am securely fastened now by my well-hidden rope” (35).



                                                 48
        In this line of text, something strange has occurred and been left inexplicably untold, and

in the gap that ensues, the protagonist slips through the lined bars of the wallpaper and merges

her identity with the fantasized forms of women fleeing its influence. The final instance occurs in

the last lines of the text, when John enters the locked room where the protagonist has secured

herself, and she declares, “‘I’ve got out at last,’ said I, ‘in spite of you and Jane’” (36). While this

is the first mention of “Jane,” it can be inferred from the text that she is the narrator of the story,

and she has dissociated from herself by merging her identity with the anonymous women who

are exiting the wallpaper. It is possible that “Jane,” as an anxious and submissive wife, may have

been a threat to the new identity assumed by the protagonist and opposed her quest to escape.

        The textual omissions present spaces where readers are invited to construct the story and

apply their own hypothesized endings grounded in interconnected networks of experience.

Narrative gaps and omissions of silence are interesting literary features that enhance hypothetical

text worlds with their creative capacity to form indeterminacies in the text that open alternative

possibilities for readers. Gilman’s decision to abrogate her text at critical junctures of revelation

combines with the indeterminate nature of the text to pose difficult questions of interpretation for

readers, who are, as Iser notes, “driven by the urge to group things together and unravel the

tangle, but any attempt to do so reflects [their] own personal preferences rather than any

supposed objective meaning” (111). The question of indeterminacies in narrative are in and of

themselves interesting subjects of conjecture among literary theorists, who argue the full extent

of a text can never be fully known, nor any tale ever told in its entirety (Iser:1980, 55). Gilman’s

deliberate omissions of narrative qualify to fulfill that obligation between author and reader to

create and make sense of possible worlds of fantasy and fiction to satisfy that commitment.




                                                   49
                                     CHAPTER 6. SUMMARY

       The text used in this analysis follows the version most closely confirmed as Gilman’s

original writing and, therefore, contains her exclamation marks, abbreviated sentence structure

and, most importantly, the way in which Gilman structures her abrupt and arbitrary paragraphs.

A fundamental feature of Gilman’s writing is the abrupt shift of topic without explanation,

creating what Bernaerts refers to as “narrative lacunae” in which reader’s “mobilize . . .

knowledge and experience to supplement what is left unsaid” (2). Gilman’s artful use of silence

in an unfinished line of thought or text and her abrupt ending of a paragraph set it apart from the

rest of her narrative, emulating the style and manner of a personal account or diary. In such an

account, the reader is left to infer from these expressive silences the author’s intent. While this

analysis adheres to a feminist interpretation of the text, the results appear to validate that

perspective, given the author was committed to a platform of activism defending women’s rights

and underwent a similar experience of isolation. The application of Hypothetical World Theory

applies well to this analysis in that it supplies the necessary ideas substantiating theories of mind

and the construction of possible alternatives in fictional worlds. In her use of linguistic features,

Gilman achieves her intended meanings and salience through textual omissions that insert gaps

into the text that allow/insist upon the intervention of the reader’s understanding through which

new texts are composed. In Gilman’s story, the narrative gaps, inexplicable silences, and

omissions of text are literary devices to create spaces in the text where readers are invited to

participate in fashioning alternative endings by filling in what has not been written or by

imagining what could have happened. The abrupt and awkward silences that mark her text

conflict with the smooth continuity of the script and disrupt the comfortable expectations of the

reader, who, instead of revelation, finds empty spaces of absent narration.



                                                  
