STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The field of Linguistics has been a highly beneficial academic discipline to me. To add to the existing body of knowledge and to model my work on the principles of existing scholars like Ferdinand de Saussure, Leonard Bloomfield, Noam Chomsky, M.A.K. Halliday, George Lakoff, and so on, I apply to the Linguistics Ph.D. program at the University of Texas at Austin because the course requirements and academic environment can assist me in nurturing my intellectual and professional interests in Syntax and Semantics.
My academic career has been varied and has covered many aspects of language. I received a bachelor's degree (B.A. Ed.) at Tai Solarin University of Education Nigeria, where I studied English Language and Literature. My research thesis was focused on the patterns/structures of English Syntax with respect to Noun phrases. I received a master's degree (M.A.) in English Linguistics at the University of Ibadan, Nigeria, where I expanded my research on English NPs to accommodate the patterning of the prenominal and post-nominal features of NPs as well as highlighting their functions in given discourse. This was done by using Halliday’s ideational theory of transitivity where verbs are perceived as processes. Presently, I am in the third semester of another language program (a master’s degree) in Teaching English as Second Language (TESL) at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, where I am working on the acquisition patterns found in L2 learners from different L1 backgrounds, with a focus on adjunct constituents (adjectivals) of the noun phrase.
During my academic endeavors, I have benefited greatly from several aspects of Linguistics especially in syntax, morphology, phonetics and phonology, semantics, pragmatics, stylistics, and sociolinguistics. My love for Halliday’s Systemic Functional Linguistics and later Chomky’s Generative Grammar developed my early interests in research related to grammar. In fact, my undergraduate and first MA projects’ data were analyzed using the ideational, interpersonal and textual meta-functional theories. Apart from my academic training, I have worked to complement my studies with practicum experiences in terms of teaching English learners at different proficiency levels. I have had the opportunity to teach English to intermediate-high adult learners who are enrolled in the Intensive English Program (IEP) at SIUE. I also had a chance to address language challenges such as transfer and interlanguage issues among learners. Also, I possess good skills in academic research writing as I have worked as a Research assistant to Prof Larry LaFond, where I completed a research project on ‘'the use of conceptual metaphors in President Biden Broadcasts on Covid-19". For this research, I was honored at the SIUE 2022 Honor's Day dated April 10, 2022, as the co-winner of the Schaefer Linguistics Award. I have articles published in both international and local journals. My experiences as a teacher and researcher were exciting and intellectually stimulating. I apply to the English Ph.D. program at the University of Texas at Austin because the course requirements can assist me learn more about language forms, meaning and typology universals. Moreover, the program can provide me with an invaluable platform to discuss more about how the aspects of semantics and pragmatics affect the structure of syntax in languages.
My linguistic research training has been largely focused on syntactic structures of languages. First, my undergraduate thesis was mainly about identifying the patterns and complexities associated with NPs in English language usages. The findings of my thesis propelled and rekindled my interest to explore more about the specific patterns and functions of Noun phrase, situated within different contexts of discourse. Both projects revealed that the context of use can affect the structure of NPs with respect to parameter setting around the head and their functions with respect to their theta roles: agent, recipient, theme etc. Presently, I am working on the acquisition patterns found among L2 learners from different L1 backgrounds such as Nepali, Hindi, Yoruba, and Igbo languages. The research involves showing the patterns of pronominal adjective ordering acquired among non-native speakers of English with respect to transfer effects. It investigates how they acquire and model adjective patterns in alignment with the native speakers of English. The study shows how semantics influences syntactic patterns because adjective ordering is not just a syntactic phenomenon as many consider it to be. It is also determined by a variety of semantic variables. Some of these variables are quality, size, shape, age, colour, material etc., with a sequential patterning. In fact, Quirk (1985) proposed that adjective order should be based on how subjective vs objective the semantic variables of the adjectives are. The little knowledge I gathered collecting data raises my consciousness about a few things. Despite working with a small sample size of population, I found that adjectives with noun-like features are closer to the head than non-nounlike adjectives; thus ‘a nice square
box’ instead of ‘a square nice box’. Shape adjectives like ‘square’ are nounlike than quality adjectives. Nominal adjectives that convey material (e.g. leather), nationality (e.g. American) are often drawn closer to the head. This result corroborates Quirk’s (1985) hypothesis of subjectivity. However, subjects face difficulty while ordering English adjectives that are semantically close to each other (e.g. size and shape). Subjects find it difficult to model a specific pattern for adjectives with very close semantic identities like ‘a big round ball’. Also, dealing with adjectives that have no sense of referent in subject’s L1 poses challenges to acquisition. For instance, ‘oblong’ (a shape adjective) is substituted for ‘rectangular’ in the responses of Nepali and Hindi speakers. The study also identified that Nepali and Igbo learners have a better performance with respect to how they model their adjectival patterns in alignment with the native speakers of English. This contradicts my earlier prediction that Nepali and Hindi speakers would perform better since attributive adjectives in both languages are prenominal as in English. Most of my works on grammar are modelled upon the theories of Halliday’s Systemic Functional Linguistics as well as Chomky’s Generative Grammar.
In my studies toward a doctoral degree, I am specifically interested in examining the internal structure (and probably functions) of other phrasal categories (in addition to NPs) in more languages of the world. Being a native speaker of Yoruba Language and having studied parametric variations in few languages (for example, Nepali, Hindi, Igbo and Yoruba), I want to examine the complexities with parameter settings in more languages and how they are constrained or limited by semantic and pragmatic choices. For instance, while attributive adjectives in English language are ordered sequentially before the head of an NP (Frank, 1972), attributive adjectives in Yoruba language are usually properties of post-modification. However, some adjectives in Yoruba language could be placed pronominally when performing pragmatic functions such as expressing a special quality of a person or thing. I would be interested in examining how cognitive priming affects the syntactic patterns. For instance, some of the subjects in my thesis revealed that they based their choice of adjective ordering on how frequent they use the adjectives to represent their experiences. As a result, frequently used adjectives tend to appear before the less frequent ones. This suggests that learners’ linguistic idiolects and the registers that are situated within their culture influence syntactic patterns. This brings about the place of context since our experiences differ from one person to another. This suggests that there is a connection between syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, as I went into this thesis with syntax in mind, but pragmatics sets in, hence the need to explore the interface/nexus between these concepts.
In addition to my research interest in Syntax, cognitive linguistics is another area that I would like to explore. In addition to syntax, I have also explored aspects of cognitive linguistics, like 'the use of conceptual metaphors in President Biden Broadcasts on Covid-19". I adopted a dual-model conceptual approach which integrates Lakoff and Johnson’s (2003) Conceptual Metaphor Theory and Santibez’s (2010) Metaphorical Argumentative Mechanism. The study examined war, wave, and fire metaphors as conceptual domains that were captured in the discourse related to Covid-19. Going further, I would be interested in further examining the connections between form and meaning in language and how language use reflects conceptual structures.
What I seek from graduate school, specifically the University of Texas at Austin’s Ph.D. program in Linguistics, is the foundation and guidance to further pursue my academic and research interests. My work with Noun Phrases and parameter settings/variations makes me especially drawn to Professor Stephen M. Wechsler’s projects: “The Role of the Lexicon in the Syntax–Semantics Interface”; “Lexical-Functional Syntax”. I would receive tremendous educational benefits studying with Professor Stephen M. Wechsler; and given the specific nature of his projects, I suspect that I could make important contributions to future design projects associated with creating the nexus between syntax and semantics/pragmatics. In addition to Stephen M. Wechsler, I also view Professor John Beavers as a potential mentor in areas of Syntax and Semantics. In turn, I can offer your program my enthusiasm for learning as well as my serious dedication to making contributions to the discourses on Syntax, Morphology Semantics, Phonetics and Phonology, and other aspects of Linguistics.
The Linguistics PhD program at the University of Texas at Austin can provide me with the spaces and mentoring that I need to continue sharpening my tools in academic settings, and to contribute to a community of scholars. Your program would assist me in attaining my professional goals.